# Tornadoes

Tornadoes are fast-spinning columns of air that reach from a thunderstorm down to the ground. They can destroy buildings, flip cars and send dangerous debris flying through the air.

Happen anytime and anywhere.

Bring intense winds, over 200 miles per hour.

Look like funnels.

If You Are Under A Tornado or Severe Weather Warning

Listen to local weather reports and officials for updated emergency information. Follow their instructions to remain safe.

Go to a public shelter if you can't stay at home.

Stay away from windows, doors, and outside walls.

Use your arms to protect your head and neck.

Watch out for flying debris that can cause injury or death.

Know your area’s tornado risk. In the U.S., the Midwest and the Southeast have a greater risk for tornadoes.

Know the signs of a tornado , including a rotating, funnel-shaped cloud, an approaching cloud of debris, or a loud roar like a freight train.

Sign up for your community’s warning system. The Emergency Alert System (EAS) and NOAA Weather Radio also provide emergency alerts . If your community has sirens, become familiar with the warning tone.

Pay attention to weather reports. Meteorologists can predict when conditions might be right for a tornado.

Identify and practice going to a safe shelter such as a safe room built using FEMA criteria or a storm shelter built to ICC 500 standards. The next best protection is a small, interior, windowless room or basement on the lowest level of a sturdy building.

Plan for your pet . They are an important member of your family, so they need to be included in your family’s emergency plan.

Prepare for a long-term stay at home or sheltering in place by gathering emergency supplies , cleaning supplies, non-perishable foods , water , medical supplies and medication.

Immediately go to a safe location that you have identified.

Pay attention to EAS, NOAA Weather Radio, or local alerting systems for current emergency information and instructions.

Protect yourself by covering your head or neck with your arms and putting materials such as furniture and blankets around or on top of you.

In a car or truck: There is no safe option when caught in a tornado in a car, just slightly less dangerous ones. If the tornado is visible, far away, and the traffic is light, you may be able to drive out of its path by moving at right angles to the tornado. If you are caught by extreme winds or flying debris, park the car as quickly and safely as possible -- out of the traffic lanes. Stay in the car with the seat belt on. Put your head down below the windows; cover your head with your hands and a blanket, coat, or other cushion if possible. If you can safely get noticeably lower than the level of the roadway, leave your car and lie in that area, covering your head with your hands. Avoid seeking shelter under bridges, which can create deadly traffic hazards while offering little protection against flying debris.

If the tornado is visible, far away, and the traffic is light, you may be able to drive out of its path by moving at right angles to the tornado.

If you are caught by extreme winds or flying debris, park the car as quickly and safely as possible -- out of the traffic lanes.

Stay in the car with the seat belt on. Put your head down below the windows; cover your head with your hands and a blanket, coat, or other cushion if possible.

If you can safely get noticeably lower than the level of the roadway, leave your car and lie in that area, covering your head with your hands.

Avoid seeking shelter under bridges, which can create deadly traffic hazards while offering little protection against flying debris.

Pay attention to EAS, NOAA Weather Radio, and local authorities for updated information.

Save your phone calls for emergencies and use text messaging or social media to communicate with family and friends.

Stay clear of fallen power lines or broken utility lines.

Contact your healthcare provider if you are sick and need medical attention . Wait for further care instructions and continue to shelter in place.

Wear appropriate gear during clean-up such as thick-soled shoes, long pants, and work gloves. Use appropriate face coverings or masks if cleaning mold or other debris .
