# Hazard Mitigation Grants

Hazard Mitigation Assistance
Hazard Mitigation Assistance Grants are provided to Washington State jurisdictions and tribal governments to reduce the effects of natural hazards and mitigate vulnerability to future disaster damage.

Announcements
March 6, 2026: Washington secures court order to enforce ruling that requires FEMA to restore billions in disaster mitigation funding

Open Grant Rounds

Swift Current Grant

BRIC FY2024-FY2025 Grant

What is Hazard Mitigation?
Hazard mitigation is any sustainable action that reduces or eliminates long-term risk to people and property from natural hazards and their effects. This definition distinguishes actions that have a long-term impact from those that are more closely associated with immediate preparedness, response and recovery activities. Hazard mitigation is the only phase of emergency management specifically dedicated to breaking the cycle of damage, reconstruction, and repeated damage. Overall natural hazard mitigation has a $6 return for every $1 spent.

Mitigation activities

1. Capability and Capacity Building activities (C&CB) to include:

Developing new Hazard Mitigation Plans or Plan Updates

Other hazard mitigation planning activities
(e.g., annexes, mapping)

Advance Assistance or Scoping
To obtain data to prioritize, select, and develop complete HMA grant applications.

Developing Partnerships
Supporting hazard mitigation efforts

Developing, adopting, and evaluating codes and standards
Supporting hazard mitigation efforts

Enhancing and enforcement of codes and standards
Supporting hazard mitigation efforts

2. Hazard Mitigation Construction Projects to include:

Property Acquisition

Mitigation Reconstruction

Structure Elevation

Stabilization

Flood Risk Reduction

Floodproofing

Tsunami Vertical Evacuation

Wildfire Mitigation

Structural Retrofits

Secondary Power Source

Warning Systems

Aquifer Recharge, Storage, and Recovery

Innovative Projects

Structure Demolition

Structure Relocation

3. Management Costs associated with the administration of a FEMA HMA grant

Who can apply?
State, local and federally recognized tribal governments are eligible to apply for FEMA mitigation grants as a sub-applicant to the Washington state’s application. In some cases, private, non-profit organizations are also eligible to apply as sub-applicants. Eligible entities may apply on behalf of individuals, businesses and private non-profit organizations. Tribal governments may also elect to apply as an applicant, separate from Washington.

Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP) Requirements

Mitigation planning is a pre-requisite for FEMA mitigation grant funding. The Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP) and HMGP-Post Fire programs require that government agencies have a FEMA-approved mitigation plan at the time of grant assistance obligation. Flood Mitigation Assistance (FMA) applicants must have a plan at the time of the Federal application deadline and at time of obligation.
Private, non-profits are not required to have a plan but a local jurisdiction who does have an approved plan must apply on their behalf.

Agencies without a plan may apply for funding to create a plan.

Check this link to find out about your plan status. You can also contact Washington State’s Hazard Analysis and Planning (HARP) Supervisor Kevin Zerbe at kevin.zerbe@mil.wa.gov.

Washington State Mitigation Priorities
Washington state prioritizes geologic and climate hazards, especially flooding, fire, earthquake, tsunami and extreme weather events.

Contact the WA Mitigation Team
For any general questions, or if you would like to be added to our mailing list, please contact HMA@mil.wa.gov.

We are excited to announce that the Emergency Management Division (EMD) is implementing a communication platform called GovDelivery to better serve our partners. GovDelivery will allow us to deliver important Hazard Mitigation Assistance funding updates, news, and programmatic information directly to your inbox, ensuring you stay informed about matters that impact you.

Registration Required!

Effective October 17, 2025, important alerts such as Notices of Funding Opportunities (NOFOs) will be sent via GovDelivery messaging and will no longer be delivered to pre-existing email distribution lists.

This does not mean that this email, hma@mil.wa.gov is going away; we will still be here to answer questions and discuss specifics. However, no alerts for funding opportunities will be distributed this way moving forward.

Thank you for your attention to this matter, and for your continued support of EMD. We look forward to keeping you informed through GovDelivery!
