# How to Prepare For Emergencies

Everyone knows the Red Cross helps people during emergencies. But you may not know that it’s also part of our mission to help you help yourself! Becoming “Red Cross Ready” for an emergency means following our simple steps in advance to ensure you can weather a crisis safely and comfortably. Being prepared may not prevent a disaster, but it will give you confidence to meet the challenge.

Be "Red Cross Ready" for an emergency by following our easy 3 steps to preparedness. We understand getting prepared may sound difficult or time consuming, but with a little help from us, it's actually very doable. Learn by watching our video today!

Make a Plan

Plan effectively for you and your family in case of an emergency.

Be Informed

Understand which disasters are likely to occur in your area and what you must know to stay safe.

More ways to prepare

Download an App

Our free apps provide tools and preparedness information you need every day.

Learn Hands-Only CPR

Watch our 2 minute video to learn how to give Hands-Only CPR to buy precious time for a person experiencing cardiac arrest.

Most Common Disasters Across the U.S.

Find out which natural disasters affect your region, then read tips about how you can prepare.

Browse our Emergency Resource Library
Now that you know which types of emergencies to plan for, browse our Emergency Resource Library to learn what to do before, during and after specific events like hurricanes, wildfires, earthquakes, and more.

People with Disabilities

When an emergency occurs, mobility challenges and hearing, learning, or seeing disabilities can add complication. We offer practical advice on getting informed, making a plan, assembling a kit, and keeping your plans up to date.

Older Adults

Older adults are assets in the community and will often be looked to for their wisdom and the unique gifts they can offer in a disaster. Being prepared and ready before and during such an event will greatly impact your ability to help and be helped during an emergency or disaster.

Workplaces and Organizations

Is your workplace prepared for emergency? American Red Cross Ready Rating is a first-of-its-kind membership program designed to help businesses, organizations and schools become better prepared for emergencies.

Preserving Precious Memories During Disaster

Taking steps to safeguard your family's physical safety from disaster is job one. But once you've done that, you might consider taking a few easy steps to prepare your family's keepsakes and treasures as well.

I know what emergencies or disasters are most likely to occur in my community.

I have a family disaster plan and have practiced it.

At least one member of my household is trained in first aid and CPR/AED.

I have taken action to help my community prepare.
