How to Prepare For Emergencies
Unknown
24 min read
https://www.redcross.org/get-help/how-to-prepare-for-emergencies.html
Need help? That’s why we’re here!
Everyone knows the Red Cross helps people during emergencies. But you may not know that it’s also part of our mission to help you help yourself! Becoming “Red Cross Ready” for an emergency means following our simple steps in advance to ensure you can weather a crisis safely and comfortably. Being prepared may not prevent a disaster, but it will give you confidence to meet the challenge.


Habla español? Esté preparado de acuerdo con La Cruz Roja >>

Be ""Red Cross Ready"" for an emergency by following our easy 3 steps to preparedness. We understand getting prepared may sound difficult or time consuming, but with a little help from us, it's actually very doable. Learn by watching our video today!

For more information on emergency preparedness, please visit http://www.redcross.org/prepare

For more information on getting help during a disaster, please visit: http://www.redcross.org/get-help

To make a financial donation, please visit: https://www.redcross.org/donate/donation

#redcross #emergency #preparedness

Red Cross and exclamation point

Download the free Emergency app today. Available in English and Spanish. Search "American Red Cross" in your app store or text "GETEMERGENCY" to 90999.

Available in the App Store® or Google PlayTM.

Apple App Store Icon and QR code

Google Play store icon and QR code





Make a Plan

Plan effectively for you and your family in case of an emergency.



Be Informed

Understand which disasters are likely to occur in your area and what you must know to stay safe.


More ways to prepare


Download an App

Our free apps provide tools and preparedness information you need every day.



Learn Hands-Only CPR

Watch our 2 minute video to learn how to give Hands-Only CPR to buy precious time for a person experiencing cardiac arrest.





Print out the Preparedness Essentials Checklist:



Thank You to Our 2025 National Sponsor

State Farm logo

Map of the U.S.

Most Common Disasters Across the U.S.

Find out which natural disasters affect your region, then read tips about how you can prepare.

Browse our Emergency Resource Library
Now that you know which types of emergencies to plan for, browse our Emergency Resource Library to learn what to do before, during and after specific events like hurricanes, wildfires, earthquakes, and more.

Girl holds up a home fire escape plan that she worked on

Sister and brother

People with Disabilities

When an emergency occurs, mobility challenges and hearing, learning, or seeing disabilities can add complication. We offer practical advice on getting informed, making a plan, assembling a kit, and keeping your plans up to date.

Get Tips and Advice

Family picture, five members

Older Adults

Older adults are assets in the community and will often be looked to for their wisdom and the unique gifts they can offer in a disaster. Being prepared and ready before and during such an event will greatly impact your ability to help and be helped during an emergency or disaster. 

Disaster and Emergency Preparedness for Older Adults

Woman with two dogs and two birds

Pillowcase Project presentation in classroom

Households, Schools and Educators

CPR instructor teaches student chest compressions

Workplaces and Organizations

Is your workplace prepared for emergency? American Red Cross Ready Rating™ is a first-of-its-kind membership program designed to help businesses, organizations and schools become better prepared for emergencies. 

Prepare Your Workplace for Emergencies
Commuter Safety
Keepsakes and old toys stored in an attic

Preserving Precious Memories During Disaster

Taking steps to safeguard your family's physical safety from disaster is job one. But once you've done that, you might consider taking a few easy steps to prepare your family's keepsakes and treasures as well. 

Learn How to Preserve Your Memories

number 1 icon

I know what emergencies or disasters are most likely to occur in my community.

number 2 icon

I have a family disaster plan and have practiced it.

number 3 icon

number 4 icon

At least one member of my household is trained in first aid and CPR/AED.

number 5 icon

I have taken action to help my community prepare.