Mass Gathering Incidents
Unknown
Unknown
https://www.ready.gov/mass-gatherings-incidents
Mass Gathering Incidents

Before a Mass Gathering Incident

During a Mass Gathering Incident

After a Mass Gathering Incident

Illnesses & Diseases

Additional Resources

Mass gatherings are events where a lot of people come together, either planned or not. These events can make it harder for the place hosting them to manage safety and resources. Examples include music festivals, concerts, parades, or big sports games. Mass gatherings can be enjoyable, but they also bring risks such as:

People with weapons like guns, knives, drones

Explosions or biohazards

Fast moving vehicles

Crowd-crushes or stampedes

Spread of illnesses or diseases

Take steps to prepare, protect yourself and help others before, during and after a mass gathering incident.

Stay alert. Always be aware of your environment and any possible dangers.

If you see something, say something® to local authorities. This includes suspicious packages or items left unattended, people acting in a clearly suspicious or threatening way or strange or threatening messages, either in person or online.

Observe warning signs . Signs might include unusual or violent communications, substance abuse, expressed anger or intent to cause harm. These warning signs may increase over time.

Have an exit plan. Identify exits and areas to hide wherever you go, including work, school and special events.

Learn lifesaving skills. Take training such as first aid to assist the wounded before help arrives.

Run to Safety - Seek safety . Getting away from the attacker is the top priority. Leave your belongings behind and get away. Call 9-1-1 when you are safe and describe the attacker, location and weapons. Keep hands visible and empty.

Leave your belongings behind and get away.

Call 9-1-1 when you are safe and describe the attacker, location and weapons.

Keep hands visible and empty.

Cover and hide if you can't evacuate. Find a place to hide out of view of the attacker and put a solid barrier between yourself and the threat if possible. Lock and block the doors, close blinds and turn off lights. Keep silent.

Lock and block the doors, close blinds and turn off lights.

Defend, Disrupt, Fight. Fight only as a last resort. When you can't run or cover, attempts to disrupt the attack or disable the attacker. Be aggressive and commit to your actions. Recruit others to ambush the attacker with makeshift weapons such as chairs, fire extinguishers, scissors, books, etc. Be prepared to cause severe or lethal injury to the attacker.

Fight only as a last resort. When you can't run or cover, attempts to disrupt the attack or disable the attacker.

Be aggressive and commit to your actions.

Recruit others to ambush the attacker with makeshift weapons such as chairs, fire extinguishers, scissors, books, etc.

Be prepared to cause severe or lethal injury to the attacker.

Help the wounded. Take care of yourself first and then help if you are able. Help the wounded get to safety and provide immediate care. Call 9-1-1 when it's safe for you to do so.

When Law Enforcement Arrives Remain calm and follow instructions. Keep hands visible and empty. Report to designated areas to provide information and get help. Follow law enforcement’s instructions and evacuate in the direction they tell you to go. Listen to law enforcement for information about the situation. Share updates as you can with family and friends.

Remain calm and follow instructions.

Report to designated areas to provide information and get help.

Follow law enforcement’s instructions and evacuate in the direction they tell you to go. Listen to law enforcement for information about the situation. Share updates as you can with family and friends.

Consider Seeking Professional Help Be mindful of your mental health. If needed, seek help for you and your family to cope with the trauma.

Be mindful of your mental health. If needed, seek help for you and your family to cope with the trauma.

Illnesses and Diseases at Mass Gatherings

Attending mass gatherings can increase your risk of getting sick or injured. This may be due to crowds, shared food and water, dirty conditions, poor airflow, or bad planning by the organizers or venue, making it easier for illnesses to spread and accidents to happen.

To protect your health before, during and after a mass gathering:

Stay informed. Check travel advisories from trusted sources.

Prepare for health risks. Talk to your doctor about your plans. Review travel notices and guidance on vaccinations, food and water safety, and disease prevention for the area of the event.

Practice safe and healthy habits. Stay hydrated. Wash your hands often and avoid touching your face. Eat and drink safe food and water. Take your medications. Wear a mask or face covering.

Monitor for symptoms and get medical help. If you are sick before the event, consider not attending to avoid getting others sick or making your symptoms worse. After the event, watch for signs of illness like fever, cough, diarrhea, or changes in your mood. Call your doctor or local health officials for medical advice or call 9-1-1 if you are experiencing a medical emergency.

If you are sick before the event, consider not attending to avoid getting others sick or making your symptoms worse.

After the event, watch for signs of illness like fever, cough, diarrhea, or changes in your mood.

Call your doctor or local health officials for medical advice or call 9-1-1 if you are experiencing a medical emergency.

Active Shooter Information Sheet (PDF)

Prepare for Explosions

Prepare for Biohazards

Prepare for Fires

Prepare for Pandemics

Partner Resources

If you see something say something ® (DHS)

RUN. HIDE. FIGHT.® Surviving an Active Shooter Event (Video)

Prevent Mass Violence (FBI)

Mass Attacks Defense Toolkit

Active Shooter Preparedness Resources (DHS)

Active Shooter Preparedness Resources Translated (DHS)

CDC Traveler’s Health

U.S. Department of State’s Travel Advisories

Last Updated: 05/13/2026
